Developer Guidelines For Adding New Dependent Libraries
======================================================

## Our dependency library philosophy

In short, requirements for adding a new library are:
- indispensable functionality
- license compatibility
- availability for all platforms

## Indispensable functionality

In general, adding a new dependency library (of which we currently have more than a handful, e.g. Xerces-C or ZLib)
imposes a significant integration and maintenance effort. Thus, the new library should add **indispensable functionality**. 
If the added value does not compensate for the overhead, alternative solutions encompass:

- write it yourself and add to the OpenMS library (i.e. its repository) directly
- write a TOPPAdapter which calls an external executable (placing the burden on the user to supply the executable)

## License compatibility

OpenMS has a BSD-3 clause license and we try hard to remove dependencies of GSL-like libraries. Therefore, a new library
with e.g. LGPL-2 would be prohibitive.


## C++ standard compatibility

New dependency libraries needs to be compatible and therefore compilable with the same C++ standard as OpenMS.

## Availability for all platforms

OpenMS has been designed for Windows, macOS, and Linux. Therefore, the new dependency library needs to be designed for
these platforms.

- on **WindowsOS** this usually means, adding the new library to the Contrib in debug and release variants. In short all
  recent versions of Visual Studio (VS2008 and onwards) must be supported (or support must be added). This encompasses
  - a solution file (which can be either statically present or generated by a meta-system like CMake) is available
  - The library actually compiles and is linked to the **dynamic** VS-C++ runtime lib (since this is what the OpenMS lib
  will link to as well - combining static and dynamic links will lead to linker errors or segfaults).

- on **macOS** it should be ensured that the library can be build on recent macOS versions (> 10.10) compiled using the
  mac specific _libc++_. Ideally the package should be available via **HomeBrew** or **MacPorts** so we can directly use
  those libraries instead of shipping them via the contrib. Additionally, the MacPorts and HomeBrew formulas for 
  building the libraries can serve as blueprints on how to compile the library in a generic setting inside the contrib 
  which should also be present.

- on **Linux** since we (among other distributions) feature an OpenMS Debian package which requires that all 
dependencies of OpenMS are available as Debian package as well, the new library must be available (or made available) as 
Debian package or linked statically during the OpenMS packaging build.

## How to add it to the contrib build

Add a CMake file to `OpenMS/contrib` into the `libraries.cmake` folder on how to build the library. Preferably of course
the library supports building with CMake (see Xerces) which makes the script really easy. It should support static and
dynamic builds on every platform. Add the compile flag for position independent code (e.g. `-fpic`) in the static 
version. Add patches in the *patches* folder and call them with the macros in the `macros.cmake` file. Create patches 
with `diff -Naur original_file my_file > patch.txt`. If there are problems during applying a patch, make sure to double 
check filepaths in the head of the patch and the call of the patching macro in CMake.

- All the libraries need to go into (e.g. copied/installed/moved) to `$buildfolder/lib`
- All the headers under `$buildfolder/include/$libraryname` (the only exception to leave out the library name subfolder
  is when the `Find$libraryname.cmake` does not support this subfolder e.g. because system libraries are not structured
  like this, see boost).
- All needed files into `$buildfolder/share/$libraryname`

Then test the build on your platform including a subsequent build of OpenMS using that library. Submit a pull request to
`OpenMS/contrib`. Submit a pull request to `OpenMS/OpenMS` that updates the contrib submodule. Make sure the libraries
are correctly shipped in pyOpenMS and the packages (especially dynamic libraries and especially on Windows).
